Welcome to part one of
our probability review.
The first time that we need these
concepts in the course, is for
those of you who want to understand
the analysis of Quicksort.
Why it runs in big O of
n log n time on average.
And these topics will also come up
a couple of other times in the course.
For example when we study a randomized
algorithm for the minimum cut
program in graphs and also when we try to
understand the performance of hashing.
Here are the topics we're going to cover.
We'll start at the beginning with sample
spaces and then we'll discuss events and
their probabilities.
We'll talk about random variables,
which are real valued
functions on a sample space.
We'll talk about expectation,
which is basically the average
value of a random variable.
We'll identify and
prove a very important property,
called the linearity of expectation,
which will come up over and over again.
In our analyses of randomized processes.
So that's going to be the topics for
part one.
Then we'll conclude the video with one
example tying these concepts together in
load balancing.
And this video is by no means the only
source you can turn to to learn about
these concepts.
A couple of other sources I recommend are
the online lecture notes by Eric Lehman
and Tom Leighton.
Also, there's a Wikibook on discrete
probability, which you could check out.
And I want to be clear this is
really not meant to be a course or
a tutorial on probability concepts,
it's really only meant to be a refresher.
So I'm going to go at
a reasonably fast pace and
it's going to be a pretty
cursory presentation.
And if you want a more thorough review,
I would check out one
of these other sources.
Or your favorite book on
Discrete Probability.
And along those same lines,
I'm thinking that many of you have
seen some of this material before.
Don't feel compelled to watch this video
straight from the beginning to the end.
Feel free to just sort of dip in and
review the concepts that
you need a refresher on.
So, let's start at the beginning
with sample spaces.
So what is a sample space?
Well, we're analyzing random processes so
any number of things could happen.
And in the sample space is just
the collection of all of the things
that could happen.
So this is basically the universe in which
we're going to discuss probabilities and
average values.
So I'll often use the notation big
omega to describe the sample space.
So one thing we've got going for
us in the design of algorithms
is typically we can take
omega to be a finite set.
So that's why we're dealing
only with discrete probability
which is a very happy thing.
because that's much more elementary
than more general probability.
In addition to defining the outcomes,
everything that could possibly happen,
we need to define what is the probability
of each individual outcome.
So of course the probability of each
outcome should be at least zero,
should be non-negative.
And there's also the obvious constraint
that the sum of the probabilities
should be one.
So exactly one thing is going to happen.
Now I realize this is
a super abstract concept and
the next few definitions
are also a little abstract.
So throughout them I'm going to
use two really simple,
really concrete examples to
illustrate what these concepts mean.
So the first example is just going to
be you take two six sided dice and
you roll them.
And of course, the same space is just
the 36 different outcomes you could have
of these two dice.
And assuming that each of these two dice
is well crafted, then we expect each of
these 36 outcomes to be equally likely, to
occur with a probability of one over 36.
The second running example I'm going to
use is more directly related to
algorithms, and it's motivated
by the quick sort algorithm.
Recall that we're studying
the implementation of Quicksort
that chooses a pivot, uniformly
a random in every recursive call.
So, let's just focus on the very first
outer most call of Quicksort and
think about the random choice
of the pivot just in that call.
So, then in the sample space all of
the different things that could happen is
just all of the end different choices for
a pivot assuming the array has length n.
So we can represent the sample space just
as the integer is one two all the way up
to N corresponding to the array
index of the randomly chosen pivot.
And again by definition by the def
construction of our code each
of these things is equal to
likely probability of one over N.
Now let's talk about events.
An events is nothing more than a subsets
of all of the things that could happen,
that is a subset of
the sample space omega.
The probability of an event isn't exactly
what you think it would be, it's just
the sum of the probabilities of all of
the outcomes contained in that event.
Right, so an event is just a bunch
of stuff that might happen.
We know the probability of each
individual thing that can happen,
we add them up to get
the probability of an event.
So the next two quizzes are meant to give
you some practice with these concepts.
And in particular,
they'll ask you to compute the probability
of events in our two running examples.
So on the first quiz, this is our first
running example where we think about two
dice and we have our 36 possible outcomes.
Consider the subset of outcomes in
which the sum of the two dice equals 7.
What is the probability of that event?
Right so
the correct answer is the third one.
The probability is 1/ 6.
Why is that?
Well first let's be more precise
about what this event is.
What are the outcomes in which
the sum of the dice is equal to 7?
Well there's exactly six such outcomes.
1,6 2,5 3,4
4,3 5,2 and 6,1.
Each of the 36 outcomes is equally likely,
has the probability of one over 36.
So we have six members of the set.
Each has probability of one over 36.
So the probability is 1/6.
Let's move onto the next quiz, which
considers our second running example,
namely, the randomly chosen pivot.
And the outermost call to QuickSort
on an input array of length n.
So recall that in quick sort,
when you choose a pivot,
you then partition
the array around the pivot.
And this splits the input
array into two sub-arrays.
A left one.
Elements less than the pivot.
And a right one,
those bigger than the pivot.
And the more balanced the split into
theses two sub problems the better.
So ideally we'd like a 50 50 split.
So what this quiz asked you
is what fraction of pivots,
that is what's the probability that
a randomly chosen pivot will give you
a reasonably good split?
Meaning both of the sub problems
have size at least 25%.
That is you get a split 25, 75 or better.
That's what this quiz asks about.
What's the probability that your randomly
chosen pivot satisfies that property?
So the correct answer to this
quiz is again the third option.
It's a 50% probability you
get a 25-75 split or better.
So to see why let's again be precise
about what is the event that we're
talking about.
Then we'll compute its probability.
So when does a pivot give
you a 25-75 split or better?
Well for concreteness,
suppose the array contained just
the integers between one and 100.
Now, what's the property we want?
We want that both of the two subarrays
have at least 25% of the elements,
neither one has more
than 75% of the elements.
Well, if we choose an element that's 26 or
bigger in value.
Then the left sub-problem will
have at least 25 elements,
the numbers 1 through 25.
And if we choose an element that's
at most 75, then the right subarray
is going to have at least 25 elements,
namely the numbers 76 to 100.
So anything between 26 and 75, inclusive,
is going to give us a 25-75 split.
More generally, any pivot from
the middle 50% of the quantiles,
is going to give us the desired split.
So we do badly if we get something
within the first quarter,
we do badly if we get something
within the last quarter.
Anything in the middle works.
So more formally, we can say that
the event s that we're analyzing
is among the possible pivot choices.
We're interested in the ones that
is not in the first quarter and
not in the last quarter.
Now the cardinality of this the number of
pivots in this set is essentially half of
the overall number of pivot choices.
I'm ignoring fractions here for
simplicity.
The probability of this event
is the cardinality of this times
the probability of each of
the individual outcomes.
And since we choose the pivot
uniformly at random,
each one has a probability of one over n.
So you get n/2 / n, or 1/2.
Now that we've explored the concept
of events in our one or two examples.
We see that the probability that
the sum of two dice is equal to 1/6.
A useful fact to know if
you're ever playing craps.
We know that a pivot
gives us a 25-75 split or
better in a randomized quick
sort with 50% probability.
A useful fact if you want to
develop intuition for
why quick sort is, in fact, quick.
That's events.
Let's move on to random variables.
Random variables are basically some
statistic measuring what happens in
the random outcome.
Formally, if we want to define it.
It's a real-valued function
defined on the sample space omega.
Given an outcome,
given a realization of the randomness.
This gives you back a number.
The random variable that we most often
care about in algorithm design is
the running time of
a randomized algorithm.
That's the case, for example,
with the quick sort algorithm.
Notice, that is, in fact,
a random variable.
If we know the state of the world.
If we know the outcome of all the coin
flips that our code's going to make.
Then there's just some running
time of our algorithm.
So, in that sense, it's a random variable.
Given the outcomes of the coin flips,
out pops a number.
The running time, say,
in milliseconds, of the algorithm.
Here, I'm going to give you a couple more
modest examples of random variables in our
two running examples.
If we're rolling two dice.
One very simple random variable
takes as input the outcome,
the result of the two dice.
And spits out the sum.
That's certainly a random variable.
On any given outcome, it's going to take
on some some integer value between 2,
at the minimum, and 12, at the maximum.
Our second running example is
the randomly chosen pivot made
by the outermost call to quick sort.
Let's think about the random variable,
which is the size.
Meaning the subarray length,
passed to the first recursive call.
Equivalently, this random variable is
the number of elements of the input array
smaller than the randomly chosen pivot.
This is a random variable that takes
on some interval value between zero,
at the smallest.
That's if we happen to pick the pivot
equal to the minimum of the array.
And n-1 at the largest.
That's if we happen to pick the maximum
element as the pivot element.
Next, let's talk about
the expectation of a random variable.
This is really nothing
more than the average.
Of course, when you take
the average of some statistic.
You want to do it weighted by
the probability of its various values.
Let's just make that precise real quick.
Consider some random variable, X.
The expectation,
this is also called the expected value.
And the notation is capital E, square
bracket, then of the random variable.
Again, in English,
the expectation is just the average value.
Naturally weighted by the probability
of the various possible outcomes.
Or more mathematically,
we sum over everything that could happen.
So let i denote one possible outcome.
We look at the value of this random
variable when that outcome occurs.
And then we weight up times
the probability of that outcome occurring.
The next two quizzes ask you
to compute the expectation of
the two random variables that we
identified on the previous slide.
The first quiz is about two dice.
And the random variable, which is
the sum of the values of those two dice.
What is the average of
that random variable?
What is its expectation?
The answer to this question
is the second option.
The average value is 7.
There's a bunch of
different ways to see that.
In my opinion, the best way to compute
this is using linearity of expectation.
Which is the next concept
we're going to cover.
If you wanted to, you could just
compute this by brute force.
By which I mean, you could iterate
over all 36 possible outcomes.
Look at the value of the two dice in each.
And just evaluate that sum we had in
the definition on the last slide.
A slightly sneakier way to do it, if you
don't know linearity of expectation.
Would be to pair up the various outcomes.
So it's equally likely that the sum
of the two dice is 2 or 12.
It's equally likely to be 3 or
11, 4 and 10, and so on.
Each way of pairing up these values
of the two dice results in 14.
When you average, you get 7.
But, again, the right way to do
this is linearity of expectation.
Which we'll cover next.
The second quiz covers the second
random variable we identified.
Now we're back to QuickSort.
And the random pivot chosen
in the outermost call.
The question is, how big, on average,
an expectation is the subarray
in the first recursive call?
Equivalently, on average,
how many elements are going to be
less than the randomly chosen pivot?
The correct answer to this
quiz is the third option.
In fact, it's actually quantity n-1 / 2,
not n/2.
But, basically, half the elements.
Again, this sort of a sneaky
way to see this if you want.
Which is that, clearly,
the two recursive calls are symmetric.
The expected value of the left recursive
call is going to be the same as
the expected size of
the right recursive call.
The two recursive calls always
comprise n-1 of the elements.
Because they're symmetric,
you expect half in each.
So n-1 / 2 in each.
Though for this problem, I think it's
perfectly fine just to compute this
using the definition of expectation.
If we let X denote the random variable
that we care about, the subarray size.
Then we can just compute directly by
summing over all of the possible outcomes.
All of the possible choices of the pivot.
With probability 1/n,
we choose the minimum of the pivot.
Resulting in 0 elements being
passed to the first recursive call.
With probability 1/n,
we pick the second smallest element.
Resulting in 1 element being passed
to the first recursive call.
With probability 1/n,
we pick the third smallest.
Giving us a subarray size of 2.
And so on.
With probability 1/n,
we pick the maximum element.
Giving us a subarray size of n-1.
If you just compute this sum out,
you will get, as expected, n-1 / 2.
Expectation is the last definition that
I'm going to give you in this part one
of the probability review.
Next, is our fifth and
final concept for this video.
Which is Linearity of Expectation.
That's not a definition.
That's more of a theorem.
What is linearity of expectation?
This is a very simple property of random
variables that's super-super-important.
This comes up all the time when
we analyze randomized algorithms.
And random processes, more generally.
What is linearity of expectation?
It's the following, very simple claim.
Which I'll sometimes denote
just by LIN EXP, for short.
Suppose you got a bunch of random
variables defined on the same sample
space.
Then, if you want to think
of the expected value
of the sum of these random variables.
It doesn't matter if you take the sum
first and then take the expectation.
Or if you take expectations first and
then sum.
That is, the expected value
of a sum of random variables
is equal to the sum of the expectations
of the individual random variables.
One of the reasons linearity
of expectations is so
ubiquitously useful is
because it always works.
No matter what these random variables are.
In particular, even when the random
variables are not independent.
Now, I haven't defined independent
random variables, yet.
That will come in part two,
the probability review.
But hopefully, you have an intuitive
sense of what independence means.
Things are independent if knowing
something about one of the random
variables Doesn't influence what you
expect from the other random variable.
Now I realize the first time you
see linearity of expectation it's
a little hard to appreciate.
So first of all as far as the applications
we'll see plenty throughout this course,
pretty much every single application
of probability that we'll see
the analysis will involve
linearity of expectation.
But it may be hard to appreciate
why this is not a tautology.
Just symbolically,
it may look like it has to be true.
But to point out that there is content
here, if I replace the sums by products,
then this equation would
in general be false,
if the random variables
are not independent.
So the same thing is not true about
products, it's really about sums.
So let me just give you a trivial
illustration of linearity of expectation,
point out how it really easily allows
us to evaluate the sum of two dice.
So in our first running example let's
introduce the random variables x1 and
x2 for the results of the first and
second die respectively.
Now computing the expected
value of a single die is easy.
There's only six outcomes to
a enumerate over contrast that
with the 36 outcomes to enumerate over
when we evaluated the sum of the two dies.
So the average value of a single die you
won't be surprised to hear is 3.5 right?
So it ranges integers between 1 and
6 uniformly so 3.5 on average.
And now using linearity of expectation,
the sum of two dice is simply double
the average value of a single one.
So in the next slide I'm
going to prove this property,
prove linearity of expectation, but
frankly the proof is pretty trivial, so
if you don't care about the proof that's
fine you can skip it without loss I'm
inclusing just for completeness.
And I got to say I don't know of
another mathematical statement which is
simultaneously so trivial to prove and
so unbelievably useful.
It's really something remarkable
linearity of expectations.
So how's the proof go,
well honestly we just write out the sum,
the definition of an expectation,
then we reverse the sums, and we're done.
So let me start with the right
hand side of the equation.
So that was the sum of expectations
of the random variables.
So now let's just apply
the definition of expectation.
So it's just a weighted average
over the possible outcomes.
In that one, instead of summing
first over the random variable j,
and then over realized outcome i,
I'm going to do it in reverse order.
I'm going to sum first over the outcome
i and then over the random variable j.
Now the probability of outcome
i is independent of j so
we can yank the p(i)
outside of that inner sum.
But now what have we got?
So inside the parentheses
we simply have the value
of the sum of the xji's,
xj's on the outcome i.
And then over here,
we're just averaging the sum of the xj's
with respect to the probabilities,
the pi's.
So this is just the definition of
the expectation of the sum of the random
variables.
So that's it.
So linearity of expectation is really
just a reversal of the double sums.
Now for those of you that are rusty
on these kinds of manipulations
I just want to point out, this reversal of
the double sum itself is there's nothing
complicated at all about what's going on.
So if you want a really pedestrian
way to think about what's happening,
just imagine that we take these sum ends,
these xji, pi's.
And we just write them out in a grid,
where one, or let's just say, the columns
are indexed by the random variable j, and
the rows are indexed by the outcome i.
And in a given cell of this grid,
we just write the, sum end, xji times pi.
So if you get lost in the notation
with these double sums,
the point is you can just interpret
each of them in terms of this grid.
Both of these double sums are nothing
more than the sum of the values
in all of the cells of this grid.
One order of summation just says you
group first according to row sums and
then sum those up.
That's the first summation.
The second summation, you first take
column sums and then sum those up.
But of course it doesn't matter, you just
get the result of everything in the grid.
Okay, so there's no tricks up my
sleeve when I reverse these sums,
it's a totally elementary, trivial thing.
Okay, so again linearity of expectation,
trivial to prove, incredibly useful.
Don't forget it.
So I want to conclude this video with
one final example in order to tie
together all of the concepts that
we've just learned, or just reviewed.
And that's going to be
an example about load balancing,
assigning processes to servers.
But this in fact is quite important for
the analysis of hashing that we're
going to see toward the end
of the course as well.
But for now lets just think about
the following simple problem.
For some integer n, you have n computer
processes that have to be assigned to n
servers in some way.
Now, you're feeling very lazy, okay, so
you're just going to take each of these
processes and you're just going to
assign it to a totally random server,
okay with each server equally
likely to get a given process.
And the question I want to study
is does this laziness cost you,
at least on average?
So if you look at the server,
what's the expected load?
So let's proceed to the solution,
the answer of this question.
So before you start talking about
expectations one has to be clear
about the sample space and what are the
probabilities of the various outcomes.
So remember the sample space
omega just denotes every possible
that could happened.
So what are we doing for each process
we're assigning to a random server, so
all of the things that can happen are all
of the different assignments of these n
processes to these n servers.
And if you think about is
there are n raised to the n
possible outcomes cause you have n
choices for each of the n processes.
Moreover, because each process is assigned
to one of the servers uniformly at random,
each of these n to the n
assignments is equally likely,
probability 1 over n to the n.
Now that we have a sample space, we're in
a position to define a random variable.
And we already know what
random variable we care about,
we care about the average
load of the server.
Now all of the servers
are exactly the same,
so we just have to focus on one server,
let's say the first server, and look at
the number of processes assigned to it.
And if you go back to the problem
statement, what we're asked, is to compute
the expected value of Y, the expected
number of processes assigned to a server.
Now of course, in principle, we could
go to the definition of expectation and
just compute by brute force the sum
over all possible outcomes of
the value of y and take the average.
Unfortunately, there are n to the n
different outcomes, and that's a lot.
So what could we do other than
this brute force computation?
Well recall our example of linearity
of expectation in the sum of two dice.
We observe that instead of computing the
sum by enumerating over all 36 outcomes,
it was much better to just
focus on a single die,
compute its expectation and then
conclude with linearity of expectation.
So we'll do the same thing here.
Instead of focusing on the sum y,
we'll focus on constituent parts of y.
So whether or not a single process
gets assigned to the first server.
And then we'll get away with that
by linearity of expectation.
So more precisely, for a given process j
let's define xj to be, whether to be 1,
if and only if the jth process gets
assigned to the first server 0 otherwise.
Zero, one random variables like xj are
often called indicator random variables.
That's because they, in effect, indicate
whether or not a certain event occurs.
In this case, whether or not the jth
process gets assigned to the first server.
Why did I make this definition?
Well, observe that the total number
of processes that gets assigned
to the first server is simply the sum,
j equal 1 to n of xj,
xj says whether or not a given process,
the jth process, is on the first server.
The total number is just
the sum of these over all j.
Now, the benefit from this maneuver is we
only have to compute the expectation of
a extremely simple indicator
random variable xj.
This is like the win that we got
when we were summing up two dice,
by instead of having to compute the sum,
the expected value of the sum,
we just had to focus on the expectation
of a single die, that was really easy.
Similarly here, the expectation
of a single xj is really easy.
Specifically, let's write it out just
using the definition of the expectation.
So the expected value
of an xjis well let's
group together all the outcomes in
which it takes on the value zero.
So the contribution of the expectation
is zero for all of those outcomes, and
then there's the rest of the outcomes
where xj takes on the value one and
in those cases it contributes
one to the expectation.
Now obviously we get some happy
cancellation happening here
with the zero part.
And all we have to worry about
is the probability that xj takes
on the value one.
Okay what was xj again,
how did we define it?
Remember it's the events that,
it's 1 exactly when the jth process
gets assigned to the first server.
How are processes assigned?
Well remember the proposed solution
assigned to each process to each of the n
servers, equally likely
with uniform probability.
So the probability of the jth process is
assigned to the first service is 1 over n.
So this leaves us with just the sum
from j equal 1 to n of 1 over n.
That is we just sum up 1
over n with itself n times,
this of course is equal to 1.
So at the end of the day what we
find is that the expected number of
processes assigned to a given server
say the first server is just 1.
So at least if we only care about
averages, we lose very little from this
trivial process of randomly
spraying the process to the server.
On average, any given server
has just one process on it.
This is characteristic of the role
that randomization plays in algorithm
design in computer science more generally.
Often we can get away with really simple
heuristics just by making random choices.
Of course, quicksort is one example
of that where we get an extremely,
prevalently used practically
sorting algorithm just by making
it randomly chosen pivets
in every recursive call.